---
layout: post
title: The Linux Programming Interface Chapter 8 Users and Groups Summary
categories: tlpi
---

Users and Groups

	• /etc/passwd
		○ Login name:encrypted password:
		○ Login name
			§ There's both a UID and a user name.
		○ Encrypted password:
			§ 13 char encrypted password.
			§ If shadow passwords are enabled; this is just an "x"
				□ Encrypted password stored in shadow file
			§ If empty; no password required for this account.
		○ Numeric ID for user
			§ 0 = root
			§ Max number of IDs is 2^32 in Linux 2.4 and later
			§ Can have multiple users with the same ID but different username:password combinations
				□ Can have different file permissions for the different users
		○ Group ID
		○ Comment
			§ Information about the user
		○ Home directory
			§ Directory the user will be placed in after logging in
		○ Login shell
			§ The program that will take over upon login; e.g. /bin/bash
		○ On networked systems, password information might be stored on remote servers (e.g. with LDAP use)
			§ But on stand-alone systems, password info is in /etc/passwd.
	• /etc/shadow
		○ Only privileged programs have access to this
		○ Stores other security info beyond just encrypted passwords
	• /etc/group
		○ Group ID is stored in the password entry for the user
			§ Additional group ID's the user belongs to are stored in /etc/group
				□ Reason is historical: in early UNIX systems, a user could only belong to one group. Upon extending this, additional group memberships were noted in /etc/group.
		○ Organization:
			§ Group name
			§ Encrypted password
				□ With multi-group memberships, passwords for groups are rarely used now.
				□ In a shell session, user is prompted for group password before the shell session continues for that user with that group membership.
				□ /etc/gshadow if shadowed passwords enabled for groups
			§ Group ID (2^32)
			§ User list
		○ Examples:
			§ In /etc/passwd:
				□ Userjohn:x:1001:100:John:/home/john:/bin/bash
			§ In /etc/group:
				□ Users:x:100
				□ Staff:x:101:usersarah, userjimmy, userjohn
				□ Teach:x:104:usersarah, userjohn
			§ Userjohn belongs to users, staff and teach.
	• Retrieving user and group info
		○ Getpwnam() and getpwuid() get information from the /etc/passwd file based on username or user ID.
			§ These return a pointer to a statically allocated struct that contains the password file information for that user.
				□ If these are called again, the statically allocated struct is overwritten.
				□ You can use getpwuid_r and other similar functions that end with _r (which indicate "re-entrancy"), meaning you can copy the password file data to a separate buffer that you can save.
		○ Getgrpnam(), getgrgid() to get group information based on name/ID.
		○ UserIdFromName() etc
			§ Conversion functions from user/group ID to name or vice versa.
		○ Getpwent()
			§ Can use this in a while loop to go through all info in the passwd file
			§ Use endpwent() so that if another part of your code uses getpwent(), it will start from the beginning of the passwd file.
			§ Corresponding functions for group info.
		○ Getspnam() get info from shadow password file.
	• Password encryption and user auth
		○ Application COULD have its own DB to store username:password combinations.
		○ But imagine networked applications like SSH, FTP, etc
			§ These use UNIX username:password combos
		○ Checking passwords in UNIX uses a one-way hashing encryption algorithm.
		○ Crypt(key, salt)
			§ DES algorithm
			§ Returns 13-char encrypted password
	• Check_password example
		○ A user tries to log in by supplying their username
		○ Program fetches the corresponding encrypted password from /etc/shadow (if shadowed passwords are enabled, otherwise directly from /etc/passwd) (if shadowed, the program must run with privileges)
		○ Use getpass() to prompt the user for their password
			§ Getpass() turns off terminal echoing, so no characters are shown on the screen when typing the password
		○ Use crypt() to check if the supplied password is the same as the encrypted password in the shadow file.
		○ Important security point:
			§ Directly after encrypting the user-supplied password, instantly remove the unencrypted user-supplied password from memory by overwriting it, such as in the following way:
				□ For (p=password; p* != '\0';) {
    *p++ = '\0';
}

